upayātānāṃ sudṛśāṃ kusumāyudhabāṇapātavivaśānām |
abhivāñchitaṃ vidhātuṃ kṛtamatirapi tā jagātha vāmamiva ||1||
upayātānāṃ	who had come
sudṛśāṃ	the beautiful women
kusumāyudha-	(whom) Cupid's
bāṇa-pāta-	arrows strike
vivaśānām	(had made) helpless
abhivāñchitaṃ	desire
vidhātuṃ	to fulfil
kṛtamati:-api	having decided though
tā: jagātha	to them spoke
vāmam-iva	unfavourable like
Thou had decided to fulfil the desire of the beautiful women who had come to Thee. They were helpless as they were struck by Cupid's arrow for Thee. Yet Thou first spoke to them in an unfavourable manner.
gaganagataṃ muninivahaṃ śrāvayituṃ jagitha kulavadhūdharmam |
dharmyaṃ khalu te vacanaṃ karma tu no nirmalasya viśvāsyam ||2||
gagana-gataṃ	waiting in the skies
muni-nivahaṃ	the host of sages
śrāvayituṃ	to make them hear
jagitha	(Thou) stated
kula-vadhū-dharmam	the housewives' duties
dharmyam khalu	in accordance of Dharma indeed
te vacanaṃ	Thy words
karma tu no	actions but not
nirmalasya	of Thee who are pure
viśvāsyam	(are) to be followed
To the hearing of the sages assembled in the skies, Thou stated the duties of the housewives, for the benefit of the world. Indeed, Thy words are to be followed for they are in accordance with the Dharma. But the actions of Thee who are ever pure, should not be practiced by others, because Thy actions do not always conform to the good and bad standards of the world.
ākarṇya te pratīpāṃ vāṇīmeṇīdṛśa: paraṃ dīnā: |
mā mā karuṇāsindho parityajetyaticiraṃ vilepustā: ||3||
ākarṇya te	hearing Thy
pratīpāṃ vāṇīm-	unfavourable speech
eṇīdṛśa:	the doe eyed damsels
paraṃ dīnā:	very much grief stricken
mā mā	do not O do not
karuṇāsindho	O Thou ocean of compassion
parityaja-iti-	forsake thus
aciraṃ	for long
vilepu:-tā:	pleaded they
On hearing Thy unfavourable speech, those doe eyed women were very much grief stricken. For long did they plead saying 'O Thou ocean of compassion, do not, O do not forsake us.'
tāsāṃ ruditairlapitai: karuṇākulamānaso murāre tvam |
tābhissamaṃ pravṛtto yamunāpulineṣu kāmamabhirantum ||4||
tāsāṃ ruditai:-	by their weeping
lapitai:	(and) pleading
karuṇā-ākula-	with pity moved
mānasa:	Thy mind
murāre tvam	O Slayer of Mur! Thou
tābhi:-samam	with them
pravṛtta:	set out
yamunā-pulineṣu	on the Yamunaa sand banks
kāmam-abhirantum	desiring to sport freely
O Thou! Slayer of Mura! Moved with pity by their weeping and pleading, Thou set out to sport freely with them on the sand banks of Yamunaa river.
candrakarasyandalasatsundarayamunātaṭāntavīthīṣu |
gopījanottarīyairāpāditasaṃstaro nyaṣīdastvam ||5||
candrakara-	the moon light
syanda-lasat-	flowing and shining
sundara-	beautifully
yamunā-taṭānta-	on the Yamunaa banks
vīthīṣu	and the sand banks
gopījana-	the Gopikaas
uttarīyai:-	(by their) upper garment
āpādita-saṃstara:	spread out bed
nyaṣīda:-tvam	sat down Thou
The sand banks of Yamunaa was lit by beautifully flowing and shining moon light. There Thou sat down on the bed which was made by the Gopikaas by spreading out their upper garment.
sumadhuranarmālapanai: karasaṃgrahaṇaiśca cumbanollāsai: |
gāḍhāliṅganasaṅgaistvamaṅganālokamākulīcakṛṣe ||6||
sumadhur-	(with) sweet
narma-ālapanai:	playful talks
kara-saṃgrahaṇai:-ca	and by hands holding
cumbana-ullāsai:	and by the joy of kisses
gāḍha-āliṅgana-saṅgai:-	and by close hearty embraces
tvam-	Thou
aṅganā-lokam-	the women folk
ākulī-cakṛṣe	delighted immensely
By Thy sweet and playful talks, by holding of hands, by the joy of kisses, and by close hearty embraces, Thou delighted the women folk immensely.
vāsoharaṇadine yadvāsoharaṇaṃ pratiśrutaṃ tāsām |
tadapi vibho rasavivaśasvāntānāṃ kānta subhruvāmadadhā: ||7||
vāso-haraṇa-dine	on the day when the clothes were stolen
yat-vāso-haraṇam	that stealing of clothes
pratiśrutaṃ tāsām	was promised to them (to the gopis)
tat-api vibho	that also O Lord!
rasa-vivaśa-svāntānāṃ	to bliss overcome minds
kānta	O Charming One!
subhruvām-	(to them) the beautiful eyed ones
adadhā:	Thou gave (the promise)
On the day of the stealing of clothes, O Lord! Thou had promised to them the stealing of clothes (the removal of the sense of ego). That also, O charming One! Thou gave to the beautiful eyed women, whose minds were overcome with bliss.
kandalitagharmaleśaṃ kundamṛdusmeravaktrapāthojam |
nandasuta tvāṃ trijagatsundaramupagūhya nanditā bālā: ||8||
kandalita-	sprouting of
gharma-leśaṃ	perspiration drops(and with)
kunda-mṛdu-smera-	jasmine like soft smile
vaktra-pāthojam	and face like a lotus
nandasuta tvāṃ	O Thee the son of Nanda
trijagat-sundaram-	the most resplendent one in the worlds
upagūhya	embracing
nanditā: bālā:	were very delighted, the damsels
O Son of Nanda! The most resplendent one in the three worlds! Perspiration drops sprouted on Thy body. Thy lotus face was soft with a jasmine like smile. The damsels embracing Thee were very delighted.
viraheṣvaṅgāramaya: śṛṅgāramayaśca saṅgame hi tvam nitarāmaṅgāramayastatra punassaṅgame'pi citramidam ||9||
viraheṣu-	in separation
aṅgāramaya:	(Thou) are like burning charcoal
śṛṅgāramaya:-ca	(and) love embodied
saṅgame	in union
hi tvam	indeed are Thou
nitarām-	absolutely
aṅga-aramaya:	O Dear One! (Thou) gave delight
tatra puna:-	there again
saṅgame-api	in union also
citram-idam	wonderful it is
In separation with Thee, Thou are unbearable as a burning charcoal. In union indeed Thou are an absolute embodiment of love. O Dear One! Wonderful it indeed is that in union also, here again the women were delighted.
rādhātuṅgapayodharasādhuparīrambhalolupātmānam |
ārādhaye bhavantaṃ pavanapurādhīśa śamaya sakalagadān ||10||
rādhā-tuṅga-payodhara-	Raadhaa's bulging breasts
sādhu-parīrambha-	nicely (to) embrace
lolupa-ātmānam	eager with a mind
ārādhaye bhavantaṃ	(I) worship Thee
pavanapurādhīśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
śamaya sakala-gadān	eradicate all the ailments.
O Lord of Guruvaayur! I worship Thee who are eager in mind to nicely embrace the bulging breasts of Raadhaa. I pray to Thee to eradicate all the ailments.